docs: Add glossary to Vitess documentation (#2109)
vitessio/website: content/en/docs/glossary/_index.md

> ---

Reviewer: Created glossary page to address issue #1982, which recommends adding a glossary to help readers understand Vitess terminology. Placed in Reference section following KEDA's example referenced in the issue.

Source: https://github.com/vitessio/website/issues/1982

---
title: Glossary
description: Definitions of terms used in Vitess documentation
weight: 3000
cascade:
  skipversions: true
---

This document defines terms used throughout Vitess documentation, command-line tools, and source code.

## Backup

> A tablet state indicating the tablet is currently taking a backup of its data.

Reviewer 2: This is not correct.

> ## Backup (tablet type) {#backup-tablet-type}

Reviewer 2: We should make similar changes for the other tablet types (replica,rdonly,primary,drained, etc) as the terms are used for other things besides tablet types.

A data center, availability zone, or other failure domain. Vitess uses cells to isolate failures and route queries to geographically appropriate tablets.

## Consistent Lookup Vindex

A [lookup vindex](#lookup-vindex) that maintains consistency without requiring two-phase commit.

## Drained

A tablet state reserved for Vitess background operations. Drained tablets do not serve queries.

## Functional Vindex

A [vindex](#vindex) that computes the [keyspace ID](#keyspace-id) using an algorithmic mapping such as a hash or identity function, without consulting external data.

## Global Topology

The portion of the [topology service](#topology-service) that stores cluster-wide metadata shared across all [cells](#cell).

## GTID Position

Global Transaction Identifier position. Marks a specific point in the MySQL binary log for replication tracking.

## Keyrange

The range of [keyspace IDs](#keyspace-id) that a [shard](#shard) is responsible for. Expressed in hexadecimal notation like `-80` (up to 0x80) or `80-` (from 0x80 onward).

## Keyspace

> A logical database that maps to one or more MySQL databases. If using [sharding](#shard), a keyspace spans multiple databases; otherwise it maps to a single MySQL database. Applications interact with keyspaces as if they were single databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A logical database that maps to one or more MySQL replica sets. If using [sharding](#shard), a keyspace spans multiple MySQL replica sets (one replica set per shard); otherwise it maps to a single MySQL database. Applications interact with keyspaces as if they were single MySQL servers.
```

## Keyspace ID

A computed value that determines which [shard](#shard) contains a given row. The [primary vindex](#primary-vindex) maps a column value to a keyspace ID.

## Local Topology

The portion of the [topology service](#topology-service) that stores metadata specific to a single [cell](#cell).

## Lookup Vindex

A [vindex](#vindex) that uses a lookup table to map column values to [keyspace IDs](#keyspace-id). Enables routing queries on columns other than the sharding key.

## Materialize

A VReplication workflow that creates and maintains materialized views or realtime rollups across [shards](#shard).

## MoveTables

A VReplication workflow that migrates tables from one [keyspace](#keyspace) to another.

## mysqlctl

A command-line utility for managing the lifecycle of local MySQL instances used by Vitess.

## Online DDL

> Non-blocking schema changes that allow tables to remain available during migrations. Vitess supports multiple strategies including its native approach, gh-ost, and pt-osc.

Reviewer 2: Support for gh-ost and pt-osc have been removed.

## Reshard

A VReplication workflow that splits or merges [shards](#shard) to scale horizontally.

## Restore

A tablet state indicating the tablet is restoring data from a backup.

## Routing Rules

Configuration that overrides default query routing during migrations, allowing gradual traffic shifts between [keyspaces](#keyspace).

## Secondary Vindex

A [vindex](#vindex) that provides additional query routing optimization beyond the [primary vindex](#primary-vindex).

## Shard

A horizontal partition of a [keyspace](#keyspace). Each shard contains a subset of the keyspace's data based on [keyrange](#keyrange). An unsharded keyspace has a single shard named `0` or `-`.

## SwitchTraffic

A VReplication operation that redirects query traffic from a source to a target during workflows like [MoveTables](#movetables) or [Reshard](#reshard).

## Tablet

A combination of a `vttablet` process and its associated MySQL instance. Tablets are the basic unit of data storage and query serving in Vitess.

## Tablet Alias

A unique identifier for a [tablet](#tablet) in the format `cell-uid`, such as `zone1-100`.

## Topology Service

> A metadata store (backed by etcd or ZooKeeper) that holds cluster configuration, [replication graph](#replication-graph), and serving state. Often abbreviated as "topo."

Reviewer 2: etcd, zookeeper, or consul

> A metadata store (backed by etcd or ZooKeeper) that holds cluster configuration, [replication graph](#replication-graph), and serving state. Often abbreviated as "topo."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A metadata store (backed by etcd, consul, or ZooKeeper) that holds cluster configuration, [replication graph](#replication-graph), and serving state. Often abbreviated as "topo".
```

## Vindex

Virtual index. A mechanism that maps column values to [keyspace IDs](#keyspace-id) for query routing. Types include [primary](#primary-vindex), [secondary](#secondary-vindex), [lookup](#lookup-vindex), and [functional](#functional-vindex).

## VReplication

Vitess's streaming replication mechanism for data movement operations like [MoveTables](#movetables), [Reshard](#reshard), and [Materialize](#materialize).

## VSchema

Virtual schema. Configuration that defines how a [keyspace](#keyspace) is sharded, including [vindexes](#vindex), table definitions, and routing rules.

## VStream

A change notification service on [VTGate](#vtgate) that streams row changes to clients.

## VStreamer

The component on [VTTablet](#vttablet) that streams MySQL binary log events for [VReplication](#vreplication) and [VStream](#vstream).

## vtbackup

A standalone utility for taking backups of MySQL data managed by Vitess.

## vtcombo

A single-process test environment that runs all Vitess components together. Useful for local development and testing.

## VTAdmin

A web-based administrative interface for managing and monitoring Vitess clusters.

## vtctl

> The legacy command-line administration tool for Vitess. Deprecated in favor of [vtctldclient](#vtctldclient).

Reviewer 2: We should remove this as it's going away and it will be just one more thing to later remove.
